= Introduction

An API ("Application Program Interface") is a rather generic term in the world
of computer science and programming. A Linux command-line application would
consider the command names and options to be an API. A Java module would also
consider its classes, method names, and arguments to be an API. 

Basically an API means code somebody else wrote, and a Web APIs is just code
that lives on a server controlled by somebody else. 

The goal of a Web API is to provide other applications with access to specific
subsets of functionality or data that an application owns. The interactions over
the network utilize network protocols such as HTTP, AMQP, MQTT, etc., and
instead of command-line arguments or method parameters, they use URLs, query
string parameters, or chunks of data like JSON.

Some APIs are public (anyone can access the weather from
http://api.weather.gov[api.weather.gov]), some let you sign up for API keys so
you can get in but they know who you are, and some are completely locked down,
hidden away, only for people within the company to use if they're within the
right firewall or VPN (virtual private network).

APIs can give you data for a single-page JavaScript application, handle payment
information so you don't have to worry about storing credit card details, post a
Facebook status on a users timeline, allow iMovie to upload a video straight to
YouTube, send a text message, plot a bunch of pins on a map, or let you know
what the carbon intensity of the electricity grid is. They can do pretty much
anything!

Since 2009 I've been designing and building APIs, and consulting other teams on
how to build APIs. After a lot of interactions with API clients struggling, I
realized they needed to be brought into the discussion far earlier, and the job
switched to being more of an ambassador, between the API leads and the teams
interacting with that API (web, iOS, Android, etc). The conversation became more
about finding compromises and middle-ground to solve the base requirements
instead of letting everyone throw responsibilities over the fence forever. 

The role has focused around making HTTP interactions reliable, warning people of
potential problems like: don't assume everything is going to be JSON,
normalizing state management into the API instead of having loads of clients
doing subtly different guesswork, how to configure timeouts to stop half the
company's applications crashing, how to avoid wasting time and resources by
leveraging HTTP caching, escaping validation hell, dealing with change, and
testing contracts to ensure a third-party API doesn't pull the rug on your
integration.

Most of the writing I've been doing has been very "API developer" centric,
writing _Build APIs You Won't Hate_, but really that should have been "Build
APIs Your Consumers Wont Hate". Even if I had written that book, there's more
than enough horrendous APIs out there floating around that the API developers
are surprisingly content with, so I decided I should write about how API
consumers can interact with an API that is already built. One that may or may
not be any good...

The goal here is to help you interact safely, with slow, unstable, confusing, or
poorly documented APIs, to save you getting the dreaded call on the weekend.

Some of you will think of yourselves as "frontend developers", "mobile
developers, or "full-stack developers". You are definitely the target audience,
but also any other sort of software engineer who is calling an API. Who isn't
calling APIs these days? You could be a backened developer calling another API,
or be in the midst of a sea of microservices all talking to each other in myriad
of ways.

Even if you are a API developer who has never and will never call another API in
your life (who are you?!) then you can benefit from understanding more of the
users perspective

That said, if you came here looking for help building fantastic web APIs, this
might not be first book you should read. Pick up a copy of
http://apisyouwonthate.com[_Build APIs You Won't Hate_], and check out the
http://apisyouwonthate.com[_APIs You Won't Hate: Blog_] for all sorts of
articles about a whole load of topics. 

== Terminology

There is a lot of technical terms in the world of APIs, and they can have
multiple different meanings to everyone. Let's take a moment to define a few
terms that will be used throughout the book.

*Organization:* APIs are built by all sorts of folks; maybe another company,
some large like Google or Facebook, startups, governments, educational
institutions, or charity organizations. These will be referred to as an
"organization" or possibly a "company" but it could be any of these. We'll try
and be a bit more specific where it matters.

*API Developers*: Who is building the API? The API could be built by coworkers
on another team, or another department, which could be on another floor in the
same building, or on another continent. In which case when we talk to _you_,
you're the consumer of that API. When we talk about "them", its those coworkers.
Maybe you built an API because you're a full-stack developer who can do frontend
and backend! In that case you would be both "you" and "them", simply wearing
different hats throughout the process. Either way, "they" are the guardians of
the Web APIs, and we assume you have little control over the API.

*API Consumers:* The applications that interact with APIs are usually called
"API Clients", "API consumers", or "user agents". That is usually thought of as
a frontend application (browser app, iOS app, Android app, etc.), but commonly
it could be a backend applications. Backend applications talking to other Web
APIs share a lot of the same properties as a frontend application talking to
another API, so you could be an "API Developer" working on an API which is also
an "API Consumer". We interchangeably throw around "API Consumer" to mean the
application that is consuming the API, and the developer who is writing the API
consumer, which I cannot stop myself from doing. It should all make sense.

*API*: Instead of saying Web API every time we're just going to say API. In
various crowds the term "services" or "microservices" might feel more
appropriate in different scenarios, but the subtle differences between them
barely matter in the context of this book. "API" and "service" are essentially
interchangeable here. We'll dig into architecture types a bit towards the end
and get more specific then.

*Downstream/Upstream Services:* These terms are talking about the dependency
relationship between applications. If you are building an API that talks to the
Mapbox API, then the Mapbox API is upstream of your application. Their mistakes
can float downstream and cause problems for you. Your API could cause downstream
problems for your dependents (other consumers), but you'd have to try really
hard to send your problems upstream to Mapbox.

*External/Internal APIs:* APIs being made by another organization will be called
"External APIs", and APIs built by the organization you work for are "Internal
APIs".

== Backstory

"Integrating an API is easy", API developers will often say without really
understanding what they're asking from API consumers.

If you've never integrated with an API then there's a bit of a learning
curve. Beyond that, there are a lot of things to learn, a lot of
acronyms and jargon, a lot of conflicting advice on StackOverflow, and a
lot of people spouting really bad advice. There are different types of
API (REST, RPC, GraphQL, SOAP), different types of transportation layer,
lots of different errors to understand, and a tricky balancing act to
make your applications both performant and reliable. Many people don't think about HTTP timeouts
or the effects an accidental 10s hang could have on downstream systems.
What happens if the user gets on a subway half way through a
transaction... Even something as simple as an unexpected validation rule
coming back from the API can leave user stuck in a tween-state, with a
broken user interface and no way to progress. Aggh!

Some of this would be easier if API developers documenting things extensively,
but most of the time you're lucky to get an out-of-date Word document called
`API-Documentation-v2-Final-January-18-125.doc`. Sometimes you might have to
guess how the API works, and guess at what the data does. That's no easy feat!

Some of these problems are just lessons learned over time, but in the
mean time your application can be suffering all sorts of bug reports,
user complaints, server issues, and who knows what other sort of
production issues. If it's not as dire as that, there are at least other
sources of confusion that'll get you spinning your wheels trying to
figure out what to do next. 

Throughout the 2000s, most of us web developers were building frontend and the
backend in the same application. The frontend was just whatever HTML the backend
decided to spit out. Frontend developers would design the templates (HTML + data
tags), and the backend would decide which HTML template to show, and what values
to shove into those tags. Go Smarty.

It was a simple time, but there was a lot of difficulty and hair-pulling.
Sharing data between the presentation layer and the the backend was bad enough,
but sharing data between different organizations was a mess. There were various
complicated things floating around like SOAP ("Simple Object Access Protocol"),
but instead of diving into that there was a scary amount of nonsense like iframe
trickery. 

There was a whole lot of scraping websites and yoinking out data with regex. One
time built something for a financial services company to provide stocks and
shares data for the MSN Money homepage. We generated full HTML on our backend
from some horrendous CMS, then they read the whole thing, regex replaced some
special tags added just for them, cached it somehow, and shoved their own CSS on
it... It was around this time I started writing about APIs. ð¤

=== Rise of the API

Thankfully we've mostly escaped that swamp, and the vast majority of
organizations are building APIs for this sort of work, with API consumers
focusing on interface building.

On the desktop it's all about single-page JavaScript applications, with
Angular/React/Vue/Rails offering data-binding to pull and push data from a data source.
Mobiles have come on the scene and often work very similarly, regardless of if
the apps are HTML based or native.

These frontend applications can do a lot of amazing things, but APIs are going
to help with sharing data and functionality beyond the device, which can mean
saving form submissions, enabling communications with other users, charging
somebodies credit card, etc.

Sometimes the API was built as an afterthought for marketing purposes, and you
get something fairly useless. As a reaction to that the "API First" mentality
picked up, and "dog-fooding" solved this issue: using that API to power the
organizations web/desktop/mobile applications, so you know if it does or does
not work. 

As organizations did more dog-fooding that did have an unfortunate effect of
making an API very tied to specific data models and workflows that were
interesting to the organizations needs, but might not support the interests and
workflows of other API consumers. 

To solve _this_ there's now likely to be quite a few APIs at any particular
organization instead of "the API".

=== More and More APIs

Other than your company building more APIs to handle more of their own
functionality, there is an increased push to leverage other APIs and "stand on
the shoulders of giants".

Think about older video games like Rollercoaster Tycoon. They were developed by
one single software developer who could do a bunch of things. Over time, the
expectations for video games have shot up so much that no one person could ever
create the next bestselling video game singlehandedly. Now there are whole teams
of people who work on things like physics engines, with some of them focused on
really small pieces like making the most realistic hair shadows. 

With everyone focused on their specific modules, bringing them together can in
some ways be more complex, but - when packaged properly - leveraging that work
for multiple games is far easier than rebuilding it all for multiple games.
Paying the licensing fee to that existing software is certainly going to be
quicker, but it could even be cheaper, because they don't have the developers to
pull it off in house, and even if they did those salaries could cost more than
the licensing fee. 

APIs are very much the same sort of idea. Startups don't have time to build
their own SMS messaging service, so they just use Twilio. It's fantastic, it
only takes a few minutes to get started, and it means that startup can focus on
their application, which is going to make the world a better place through
drone-powered at-home underpants folding as a service.

If something awfully complex pops up like geocoding, its increasingly common to
call an external API like Mapbox API, or OpenStreet Map API,
because generating a standard interface for wildly different datasets around the
globe is a mess, and why waste time on that when you've got underpants to fold!

== Monoliths & Cluster-f**ks

Perhaps Uber for Underpants is so successful that their bottom line is being
effected with all the SMS API charges, so they decide to ditch that external API
and build an internal API which can handle SMS messaging. This all gets added
into an ever growing API which creaks and groans with all the new
responsibilities.

Alternatively as the organization grows, and the number of developers grow with
it, bits of their APIs might split off into smaller APIs so that individual
teams can work on just their piece of the puzzle internally.

Arrows are always moving around, and new APIs are being merged in, spun out,
rewritten, and forgotten about. Applications start talking to each other in
unexpected ways without telling anyone. Architectural diagrams get out of date.
Everything starts talking to everything and it just because an octopus orgy of
dependencies calling everything and everyone.

The more APIs there are, the more complex everything gets, but a well
disciplined and experienced engineering department with a strong devops culture
can eventually learn to manage this. 

These services need to talk to each other intelligently, handle various types of
error, set timeouts to protect themselves, know when to retry (and when not to!), and most importantly
identify themselves, so you don't end up with a stampeding herd; with no idea
which client is causing it.

Make sure your application is doing its part in making the ecosystem as stable
as possible, or at least make sure that the fire is isolated enough that
somebody elses garbage fire doesn't burn your house down too.
