
= RPC, REST and GraphQL

Before getting too much further, understanding the differences between
these difference concepts is going to be vital. Every API in the world
is following some sort of paradigm, whether it knows it or not. They
will fall under RPC, REST, or a "query language."

Even if you are confident you understand the difference, do yourself a
favor and read them anyway. About 99% of people get this wrong, so you
can get be in the top 1% with a quick read.

== Remote Procedure Call (RPC)

RPC is the earliest, simplest form of API interaction. It is about
executing a block of code on another server, and when implemented in
HTTP or AMQP it can become a Web API. There is a method and some
arguments, and that is pretty much it. Think of it like calling a
function in JavaScript, taking a method name and arguments.

For example:

....
POST /sayHello HTTP/1.1
HOST: api.example.com
Content-Type: application/json
{"name": "Racey McRacerson"}
....

In JavaScript, we would do the same by defining a function, and later
we'd call it elsewhere:

....
/* Signature */
function sayHello(name) {
  // ...
}
/* Usage */
sayHello("Racey McRacerson");
....

The idea is the same. An API is built by defining public methods; then,
the methods are called with arguments. RPC is just a bunch of functions,
but in the context of an HTTP API, that entails putting the method in
the URL and the arguments in the query string or body.

When used for CRUD, RPC is just a case of sending up and down data
fields, which is fine, but one downside is that the client is entirely
in charge of pretty much everything. The client must know which methods
(endpoints) to hit at what time, in order to construct its own workflow
out of otherwise incredibly naive and non-descriptive endpoints.

RPC is merely a concept, but that concept has a lot of specifications,
all of which have concrete implementations:

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML-RPC[XML-RPC]
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON-RPC[JSON-RPC]
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOAP[Simple Object Access Protocol
(SOAP)]

XML-RPC and JSON-RPC are not used all that much other than by a minority
of entrenched fanatics, but SOAP is still kicking around for a lot of
financial services and corporate systems like
https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.api.meta/api/sforce_api_quickstart_intro.htm[Salesforce].
XML-RPC was problematic, because ensuring data types of XML payloads is
tough. In XML, a lot of things are just strings, which JSON does
improve, but has trouble differentiating different data formats like
integers and decimals.

You need to layer metadata on top in order to describe things such as
which fields correspond to which data types. This became part of the
basis for SOAP, which used https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_schema[XML
Schema] and a
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Services_Description_Language[Web
Services Description Language (WSDL)] to explain what went where and
what it contained.

This metadata is essentially what most science teachers drill into you
from a young age: "label your units!" The sort of thing that stops
people paying $100 for something that should have been $1 but was just
marked as "price: 100" which was meant to be cents... It is also worth
pointing out if your "distance" field is metric or imperial, to avoid
bad math crashing your billion dollar satellite into Mars.

A modern RPC implementation is https://grpc.io/[gRPC], which can easily
be considered modern (and drastically better) SOAP. It uses a data
format called https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/[Protocol
Buffers] (or Protobuff for short), which requires a schema as well as
the data instance, much like the WSDL in SOAP. GRPC focuses on making
single interactions as quick as possible, thanks to HTTP/2, and the fact
that Protobuff packs down smaller than JSON. Fear not, JSON is available
for as an option too.

== Representational State Transfer (REST)

REST is a network paradigm described by Roy Fielding in
https://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm[a
dissertation] in 2000. REST is all about a client-server relationship,
where server-side data are made available through representations of
data in simple formats. This format is usually JSON or XML but could be
anything.

These representations portray data from various sources as simple
"resources", or "collections" of resources, which are then potentially
modifiable with actions and relationships being made discoverable via a
concept known as hypermedia controls (HATEOAS).

Hypermedia is fundamental to REST, and is essentially just the concept
of providing "next available actions", which could be related data, or
in the example of an "Invoice" resource, it might be a link to a
"Payment Attempts" collection so that the client can attempt paying the
invoice. These actions are just links, but the idea is the client knows
that an invoice is payable by the presence of a "pay" link, and if that
link is not there it should not show that option to the end user.

....
{
  "data": {
    "type": "invoice",
    "id": "093b941d",
    "attributes": {
      "created_at": "2017-06-15 12:31:01Z",
      "sent_at": "2017-06-15 12:34:29Z",
      "paid_at": "2017-06-16 09:05:00Z",
      "status": "published"
    }
  },
  "links": {
    "pay": "https://api.acme.com/invoices/093b941d/payment_attempts"
  }
}
....

This is quite different to RPC. Imagine the two approaches were
answering the phones for a doctors office:

*Client:* Hi, I would like to speak to Dr Watson, is he there? If so,
what time can I see him and what location.

*RPC:* No. *click*

*Calls back*

*Client:* I checked his calendar, and it looks like he is off for the
day. I would like to visit another doctor, and it looks like Dr Jones is
available at 3pm, can I see her then?

*RPC:* Yes.

The burden of knowing what to do is entirely on the client. It needs to
know all the data, come to the appropriate conclusion itself, then has
to figure out what to do next. REST however presents you with the next
available options:

*Client:* Hi, I would like to speak to Dr Watson, is he there? *REST:*
Doctor Watson is not currently in the office, he'll be back tomorrow,
but you have a few options. If it's not urgent you could leave a message
and I'll get it to him tomorrow, or I can book you with another doctor,
would you like to hear who is available today? *Client:* Yes, please let
me know who is there! *REST:* Doctors Smith and Jones, here are links to
their profiles. *Client:* Ok, Doctor Jones looks like my sort of Doctor,
I would like to see them, let's make that appointment.

*REST:* Appointment created, here's a link to the appointment details.

REST provided all of the relevant information with the response, and the
client was able to pick through the options to resolve the situation. Of
course REST would needed to know to look for `"status: unavailable"` and
follow the `other_doctors` link to
`https://api.doc.io/available_doctors?available_at=2017-01-01 03:00:00
GMT`, but that is far less of a burden on the client than forcing it to
check the calendar itself, ensure it's getting timezones right when
checking for availability for that time, etc.

This centralization of state into the server has benefits for systems
with multiple different clients who offer similar workflows. Instead of
distributing all the logic, checking data fields, showing lists of
"Actions", etc. around various clients - who might come to different
conclusions - REST keeps it all in one place.

Other than hypermedia (the most powerful yet most ignored part) there
are a few other requirements for a system to be a REST API:

* REST must be stateless: not persisting sessions between requests
* Responses should declare cacheablility: helps your API scale if
clients respect the rules
* REST focuses on uniformity: if you're using HTTP you should utilize
HTTP features whenever possible, instead of inventing conventions

The goal of these constraints is to make the REST architecture help APIs
last for decades, which is almost impossible to do without these
concepts.

REST also does not require the use of schema metadata, which many API
developers hated in SOAP. For a long time nobody was building REST APIs
with schema, but these days it is far more common thanks to
http://json-schema.org/[JSON Schema] (inspired by XML Schema but not
functionally identical). This optional layer is something we will talk
about a lot, as it can provide some incredibly functionality like
client-side validation, that was defined by the backend!

Unfortunately, REST became a marketing buzzword for most of 2006-2014.
It became a metric of quality that developers would aspire to, fail to
understand, then label as REST anyway, so most systems saying they are
REST are little more than RPC with HTTP verbs and pretty URLs. As such,
you might not get cacheability provided, it might have a bunch of wacky
conventions, and there might not be any links for you to use to discover
next available actions. These APIs are jokingly called RESTish by people
aware of the difference.

On the flip side, a REST API can be used in an RPC fashion if you as the
client developer chose to ignore the links. It is not advisable of
course, but it is possible.

A huge source of confusion for people with REST is that they do not
understand "all the extra faffing about" such as hypermedia controls and
HTTP caching. They do not see the point, and many consider RPC to be the
almighty. To them, it is all about executing the remote code as fast
possible, but REST (which can still absolutely be performant) focuses
far more on longevity and reduced client-coupling. I like to think of
REST as a state machine operating over a network.

REST can theoretically work in any transportation protocol that provides
it the ability to fulfill the constraints, but no transportation
protocol other than HTTP quite has the functionality to do so. To fit
REST into AMQP, you would need to define hypermedia controls somehow
(potentially an array of messages you could call next), a standard for
declaring cacheability of the AMQP messages, etc., and create a lot of
tooling that does not exist to implement that cacheing. Basically REST
is too powerful for other existing transportation protocols, so it is
generally implemented in HTTP.

REST has no specification which is what leads to some of this confusion,
nor does REST have any concrete implementations. That said, there are
two large popular specifications which provide a whole lot of
standardization for REST APIs that chose to use them:

* http://www.odata.org/[OData]
* http://jsonapi.org/[JSON-API]

If the API advertises itself as using these, you are off to a good
start. These are more than just standardized shapes for the JSON, they
have guides on pagination, metadata, manipulating relationships between
existing items, etc. Find an OData client or a JSON-API client in
programming language to save yourself some work. Otherwise go at it
yourself with a plain-old HTTP client and you should be ok with a little
bit of elbow grease.

== GraphQL

Listing GraphQL as a direct comparison to these other two concepts is a
little odd, as GraphQL is essentially RPC, with a lot of good ideas from
the REST/HTTP community tacked in. Still, it is one of the fastest
growing API ecosystems out there, mostly due to some of the confusion
outlined above.

GraphQL is basically RPC with a default procedure providing a query
language, a little like SQL - if that is something you are familiar
with. You ask for specific resources and specific fields, and it will
return that data in the response.

image::images/graphql-query.png%20width=714px%20height=194px[image]

It has Mutations for creates, updates, deletes, etc. and again they are
exactly RPC.

image::images/graphql-mutations.png%20width=715px%20height=272px[image]

GraphQL has many fantastic features and benefits, which are all bundled
in one package, with a nice marketing site. If you are trying to learn
how to make calls to a GraphQL API, the http://graphql.org/learn/[Learn
GraphQL] documentation will help, and their site has a bunch of other
resources.

Seeing as GraphQL was built by Facebook, who had previously built a
RESTish API, they're familiar with various REST/HTTP API concepts. Many
of those existing concepts were used as inspiration for GraphQL
functionality, or carbon copied straight into GraphQL. Sadly a few of
the most powerful REST concepts were completely ignored.

The backstory to GraphQL, is an interesting one. Facebook has
experimented with various different approaches to sharing all their data
between apps over the years; remember FQL? Executing SQL-like syntax
over a GET endpoint was a bit odd.

....
GET /fql?q=SELECT%2Buid2%2BFROM%2Bfriend%2BWHERE%2Buid1%3Dme()&access_token=...
....

Facebook got a bit fed up with having a RESTish approach to get data,
and then having the FQL approach for more targeted queries as well, as
they both require different code. As such, GraphQL was created as a
middle-ground between endpoint-based APIs and FQL, the latter being an
approach most API developers would never consider --- or want.

In the end, they developed this RPC-style query language system, to
ignore most of the transportation layer, meaning they had full control
over the concepts. Endpoints are gone, resources declaring their own
cacheability is gone, the concept of the uniform interface (as REST
defines it) is obliterated, which has the supposed benefit of making
GraphQL so incredibly simple it could fit into AMQP or any other
transportation protocol.

The main selling point of GraphQL is that it defaults to providing the
very smallest response from an API, as you are requesting only the
specific bits of data that you want, which minimizes the Content
Download portion of the HTTP request. It also reduces the number of HTTP
requests necessary to retrieve data for multiple resources, known as the
"HTTP N+1 Problem" that has been a problem for API developers through
the lifetime of HTTP/1.1, but thankfully was solved quite nicely in
HTTP/2.

Sadly despite being a rather nice package, GraphQL through Mutations
force the responsibility onto clients to know everything. The only
difference between RPC and GraphQL is the ability to request which
fields you get on a successful mutation.

*Client:* Hi, I would like to see Dr Watson, and if he is there, what
time can I see him and what location?

*RPC:* No. *click*

*Calls back*

*Client:* I checked his calendar, and it looks like he is off for the
day. I would like to visit another doctor, and it looks like Dr Jones is
available at 3pm, can I see her then? If so, what time can I see him and
what location.

*RPC:* Yes. 2pm at the Soho Office

That is a handy feature as it saves a tiny bit of network bandwidth, but
again the client was forced to figure out its own workflow instead of
being presented with a plethora of potential next actions. This sort of
thing makes GraphQL very nice for fetching custom reports, gathering
statistics, etc, somewhat passable at CRUD, but not particularly good
for much else. Despite that it is regularly used for APIs that would be
better suited as REST, so expect to bump into it now and then.

When you do bump into GraphQL, you will not be able to use your regular
HTTP clients, and most of things you do with any other HTTP API will not
work here, with GraphQL instead requiring its own special client tools.

=== Skinny/Fat Clients

There is one more piece of theory we need to get our heads around to
really understand the differences between these API paradigms/concepts.
In couples dancing there is usually one person leading, and another
person following. The leader will be in charge of signaling when moves
should be made, and the follower follows their hints. In REST the idea
is that the server leads. In all forms of RPC (including GraphQL), the
client leads.

We already spoke about REST "normalizing state", which is the concept of
removing the guesswork and decision making on things that the server is
authoritative on. The client application in a REST API becomes a thin
UI, which handles user interactions, forms, validations, rendering,
animations, but very little business logic. That is the theory anyway. A
lot of RESTish/RPC/GraphQL APIs force the clients to figure out things
they should not be trying to figure out, as their main interest is
trying to send as little data as possible.

== Inferring State from Arbitrary Fields

At the day job, an upstream API decided originally suggested that
clients should check for `location_uuid == nil` to infer the membership
type as an "Anywhere member" (a member who can access any of our
coworking specs. One day they changed the logic, suggesting clients
check for location_uuid == "some-special-uuid". This was not
communicated to the developers in charge of various systems as nobody
remembered which of the 50+ systems were making the check. One outcome
of that was to confuse the permissions API, which started denying things
it should not have been denying. Who even knows what else broke and what
else was fixed by various teams working on various systems. Applications
need to be investigated, fixed, and updated.

Inferring meaning from arbitrary fields can lead to production issues,
angry users, and wasted developer time debugging bizarre things. The
preferred approach in many of these situations would be to have the
current state normalized on the server with a simple field like "type"
which could have a few options like "anywhere", "other", and the API can
figure out when to display that. If the API you are working with asks
you to infer state of some random fields, politely let them know that
you don't want their laziness to break your client application. Request
they provide their data in a useful generic fashion, so the clients
don't need to guess everything.

== Available Actions

Working out the current state is bad enough, but working out what to do
"next" when you have a record can be really tough. For example, a
ReactJS application at work had loads of awful helper functions to work
out which "actions" to show next to a list of users in a company
(through the joining resource known as seats).

....
IsNotPrimaryOfAnotherCompany(user, company_uuid) {
  return _(user.data.result.seats).select(s => {
    return s.company.uuid != company_uuid &&
    s.status == "active" &&
    s.kind == "Licensee" &&
    s.company.status == "active";
  }).isEmpty();
},
....

The users and company resources have status, and seats has a kind, so
this is somewhat ok, but the client is still working really hard for
this seemingly complex, but potentially simple functionality. Business
logic states that users should not be primary members of more than one
company at the time, so a rule was made in the user management interface
to hide the "Make Primary Member" option if they were. That seems
reasonable enough, but when the iOS native codebase forgot to add that
`s.status == "active";` condition, the two devices were showing
different actions. We fixed it on iOS, and a few months later another
rule was added to the JavaScript code, causing an unexpected difference
that regression tests did not catch...

The "skinny server, fat client" approach is forcing the client to
download all the seats, and the user information, and the company, just
to spin through all the records and establish if the user can or cannot
see a "Make Primary Member" button...

The most basic thing to do for RPC would be to make a "can_be_promoted"
boolean field, which would contain all of the logic internally. The API
is a far better at handling this, it'll do it more performantly, and it
will be able to change its own ruling internally whilst still
communicating the same meaning. Try requesting that from the API
developers, and who knows you might get lucky. The REST approach would
be to normalize hypermedia controls (HATEOAS), to also normalize that
state up into the server. If the API was using a format like Siren, you
might see a link nicknamed "promote" for employees, and "demote" for
primary members. The client application could then easily be trained to
recognize the promote/demote links and show the appropriate buttons.
Siren would also handily show the metadata (URI, method, fields, etc.)
required for the client to make the change.

== You Cannot Always Be a Skinny Client

Neither approach is definitely good or bad in their entirety, it's
simply the case that skinny clients have fewer chances of
misrepresenting the state if they are given the answers explicitly.
Whenever clients try to copy the business logic rules, the chance of
different clients inferring things differently increases. Different
codebases will guess things differently, some will notice changes and
others won't, and the need to deploy multiple clients in unison becomes
a lot more common. It also generally leads to having a disparent user
experience across different devices.

Letting the server take control of such things can be a little scary,
and it also depends on the relationship the client has with the API, the
team developing it, and the intent of the client application. If the API
is a third-party, letting them lead could cause some unexpected results.
If the API was designed without the knowledge of the clients
requirements, the API might not do a very good job of leading.

=== But What About...

There is a lot more to it than that, and the terms will come up plenty
over the course of the book. Some chapters will only apply to one of
these paradigms, but most chapters will cover general concepts that
apply to one or more.
